docs(neovim): add configuration guide for Neovim as LSP client (#270)
posit-dev/air: docs/editor-neovim.qmd

---
title: "Neovim"
editor:
  markdown:
    wrap: sentence
    canonical: true
---

> # Installing the air client

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Installing the Air server
```

> First, install the Air client by following the instructions on the [Air CLI documentation](https://posit-dev.github.io/air/cli.html).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, install Air by following the instructions on the [Air CLI documentation](https://posit-dev.github.io/air/cli.html). The CLI binary bundles the Air server as well as a command line formatting tool.
```

# Configuration

> Air can be configured as a Language Server Protocol (LSP) client via [nvim-lspconfig](https://github.com/neovim/nvim-lspconfig) or as a formatter plugin via [conform.nvim](https://github.com/stevearc/conform.nvim).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Air can be configured as a Language Server Protocol (LSP) server via [nvim-lspconfig](https://github.com/neovim/nvim-lspconfig) or as a formatter plugin via [conform.nvim](https://github.com/stevearc/conform.nvim).
```

## LSP Configuration with nvim-lspconfig

> To configure Air's language server, add the following to your config:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To configure the client side to use Air's language server, add the following to your config:
```

```lua
require("lspconfig").air.setup({})
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

This is the recommended way to use Air. While the language server currently only supports formatting, it will gain more features in future.

```

Reviewer: Any thoughts about layering Air as an LSP with `languageserver`?

Reviewer 2: @lionel- do you mean having both Air and `languageserver` enabled, but using only Air for formatting?

Author: Want to add it to the config instruction?

Author: Maybe something like

If both `Air` and `languageserver` are installed, you can use the following configuration to rely solely on `Air`'s formatting capabilities:

```lua
require("lspconfig").r_language_server.setup({
    on_attach = function(client, _)
        client.server_capabilities.documentFormattingProvider = false
        client.server_capabilities.documentRangeFormattingProvider = false
    end,
})
```

Reviewer 2: I'd say it's to disable `languageserver` formatting. In theory, someone can have other LSPs attached. Either that or using the `filter` in `vim.lsp.buf.format()` that you showed.

I think the bottom line is: make sure the user is aware they need to change something as both of these have formatting capabilities.

---
title: "Neovim"
editor:
  markdown:
    wrap: sentence
    canonical: true
---

# Installing the Air server

First, install Air by following the instructions on the [Air CLI documentation](https://posit-dev.github.io/air/cli.html). The CLI binary bundles the Air server as well as a command line formatting tool.

# Configuration

Air can be configured as a Language Server Protocol (LSP) server via [nvim-lspconfig](https://github.com/neovim/nvim-lspconfig) or as a formatter plugin via [conform.nvim](https://github.com/stevearc/conform.nvim).

## LSP Configuration with nvim-lspconfig

To configure the client side to use Air's language server, add the following to your configuration. This ensures that Air automatically formats R code when you save a file:

```lua
require("lspconfig").air.setup({
    on_attach = function(_, bufnr)
        vim.api.nvim_create_autocmd("BufWritePre", {
            buffer = bufnr,
            callback = function()
                vim.lsp.buf.format()
            end,
        })
    end,

> })

Reviewer 3: Can someone help me understand why the `on_attach` is required?

I'm comparing to ruff, for example:
https://docs.astral.sh/ruff/editors/setup/#neovim

That does not have this `on_attach` hook to enable the `BufWritePre` pre-write hook. I would have thought that just setting up Air as an LSP would have activated something like this on its own.

Is Ruff's documentation missing something? Is this `BufWritePre` overkill? Or am I missing something else?

Reviewer 2: Technically, it's not reuiqred. However, without it formatting will work only on demand (by manually running `vim.lsp.buf.format()`). Adding this particular `on_attach` effectively enables formatting on save.

Reviewer 3: Ok so IIUC its like `editor.formatOnSave` in VS Code. Without that, you can invoke `Format Document` to tell the LSP to format your document, but with that setting set to `true` it will do so automatically on every save.

I guess in ruff they just didn't think to say that part.

But makes sense to me thanks!

```

This is the recommended way to use Air. While the language server currently only supports formatting, it will gain more features in future.

> If both `Air` and `languageserver` are installed, you can use the following configuration to disable languageserver formatting, ensuring that only Air handles formatting:

Reviewer: Perfect thanks!

---
title: "Neovim"
editor:
  markdown:
    wrap: sentence
    canonical: true
---

# Installing the air client

First, install the Air client by following the instructions on the [Air CLI documentation](https://posit-dev.github.io/air/cli.html).

# Configuration

Air can be configured as a Language Server Protocol (LSP) client via [nvim-lspconfig](https://github.com/neovim/nvim-lspconfig) or as a formatter plugin via [conform.nvim](https://github.com/stevearc/conform.nvim).

## LSP Configuration with nvim-lspconfig

> To configure Air as an LSP client, add the following to your `nvim/lua/plugins/lspconfig.lua`:

Reviewer 2: Personally, I would leave out the paths.
```suggestion
To configure Air's language server, add the following to your config:
```
It doesn't have to be that specific file—anywhere works,

```lua
require("lspconfig").air.setup({})
```

> To enable automatic formatting on save, add the following to your `nvim/after/plugin/lsp.lua` (or other appropriate location):

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To format files with Air on save, add the following to your configuration:
```

```lua

> vim.api.nvim_create_autocmd("BufWritePre", {

Reviewer 2: Do you think it makes sense to provide this autocmd? I'd expect everyone to already have something like this in their config.

However, for the completeness (e.g. for Neovim newcomers) it might make sense to keep it.

Reviewer 2: Worth to consider: using `ftplugin`.

Putting the below command in either `ftplugin/r.lua` or `after/ftplugin/r.lua` would have a roughly the same effect. I supposed it's a style preference of using `pattern` vs. filetypes.
```lua
vim.api.nvim_create_autocmd("BufWritePre", {
  buffer = 0,
  callback = function()
    vim.lsp.buf.format()
  end,
})
```

Author: > Worth to consider: using `ftplugin`.
> 
> Putting the below command in either `ftplugin/r.lua` or `after/ftplugin/r.lua` would have a roughly the same effect. I supposed it's a style preference of using `pattern` vs. filetypes.
> 
> ```lua
> vim.api.nvim_create_autocmd("BufWritePre", {
>   buffer = 0,
>   callback = function()
>     vim.lsp.buf.format()
>   end,
> })
> ```

I think you are right, either are fine. Maybe we can propose both solution/approach.

Reviewer 2: When responding to another comment, I just realized that `on_attach` seems to make the all-in-one `setup()` call:
```lua
require("lspconfig").air.setup({
  on_attach = function(_, bufnr)
    vim.api.nvim_create_autocmd("BufWritePre", {
      buffer = bufnr,
      callback = function()
        vim.lsp.buf.format()
      end,
    })
  end,
})
```

Author: I will use your solution, it makes sens and likely easier to configure for neovim newcomer. Thank you.

    pattern = { "*.R", "*.r" },
    callback = function()
        vim.lsp.buf.format({

>             async = true,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

I'd argue to leave that out given this note:

> Editing the buffer while formatting asynchronous can lead to unexpected changes.

I don't think it's necessary and—from what I tested—air is really quick at formatting.

            filter = function(client)
                return client.name == "air"
            end,
        })
    end,
})
```

## conform.nvim configuration

> Air can be configured as a formatter plugin via [conform.nvim](https://github.com/stevearc/conform.nvim). This allows you to format R code with Air inside code chunks in Quarto and RMarkdown documents. It can be configured by adding the following to your `nvim/lua/plugins/conform.lua`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Air can be used as a formatter via [conform.nvim](https://github.com/stevearc/conform.nvim). This allows using Air to format R code inside code chunks in Quarto and RMarkdown documents. It can be configured by adding the following to your configuration:
```

> This allows you to format R code with Air inside code chunks in Quarto and RMarkdown documents.

Is this an out-of-the-box functionality or does one need to configure tree-sitter injections? 👀

Author: I think it is out of the box, my conform config is pretty simple.

Reviewer 3: @TymekDev and @PMassicotte can you please double check that Air works in various Quarto and RMarkdown documents? I have my doubts because I went looking in conform and could not find any specific Quarto support for LSP/formatting passthrough.

If it does seem to be working, I'd love to know what I missed so I can study how it works on the conform side

Reviewer 4: > @TymekDev and @PMassicotte can you please double check that Air works in various Quarto and RMarkdown documents? I have my doubts because I went looking in conform and could not find any specific Quarto support for LSP/formatting passthrough.
> 
> If it does seem to be working, I'd love to know what I missed so I can study how it works on the conform side

@DavisVaughan conform.nvim supports injected language formatting this probably what is being meant here, the see the following: https://github.com/stevearc/conform.nvim/blob/master/doc/advanced_topics.md#injected-language-formatting-code-blocks

```lua
return {
    "stevearc/conform.nvim",
    enabled = true,
    config = function()
        local conform = require("conform")

        conform.setup({
            notify_on_error = true,
            format_on_save = {
                lsp_fallback = true,
            },
            formatters_by_ft = {
                r = { "air" },
            },
        })
    end,

> }

Reviewer 2: That's a `lazy.nvim`-specific setup. I'd suggest using a generic setup (example below) and point to conform's README for a way to install the plugin.

```lua
require("conform").setup({
  formatters_by_ft = {
    r = { "air" },
  },
})
```

What about filetypes for R markdown and Quatro?

Author: Currently not supported by air.
